This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its pages a 
reader may discover much of their character and a little of their history. 
Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of 
Westmarch that has already been published, under the title of The Hobbit. 
That story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed 
by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at large, 
and called by him There and Back Again, since they told of his journey into 
the East and his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits 
in the great events of that Age that are here related. 

Many, however, may wish to know more about this remarkable people 
from 

the outset, while some may not possess the earlier book. For such readers a 
few notes on the more important points are here collected from Hobbit-lore, 
and the first adventure is briefly recalled. 

Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numerous 
formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and good tilled 
earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. 
They do not and did not understand or like machines more complicated than a 
forge -bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though they were skilful with 
tools. Even in ancient days they were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', as 
they call us, and now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to 
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined 
to be fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless nimble and 
deft in their movements. They possessed from the first the art of 
disappearing swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to 
meet come blundering by; and this an they have developed until to Men it may 
seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact, studied magic of any kind, 
and their elusiveness is due solely to a professional skill that heredity 
and practice, and a close friendship with the earth, have rendered 




inimitable by bigger and clumsier races. 

For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less tout and 
stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much shorter. Their height 
is variable, ranging between two and four feet of our measure. They seldom 
now reach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they say, and in ancient days 
they were taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took (Bullroarer), 
son of Isengrim the Second, was four foot five and able to ride a horse. He 
was surpassed in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of old; 
but that curious matter is dealt with in this book. 

As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are concerned, 
in the days of their peace and prosperity they were a merry folk. They 
dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green; but they 
seldom wore shoes, since their feet had tough leathery soles and were clad 
in a thick curling hair, much like the hair of their heads, which was 
commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practised among them was 
shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingers and could make many other 
useful and comely things. Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather 
than beautiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to 
laughter, and to eating and drinking. And laugh they did, and eat, and 
drink, often and heartily, being fond of simple jests at all times, and of 
six meals a day (when they could get them). They were hospitable and 
delighted in parties, and in presents, which they gave away freely and 
eagerly accepted. 

It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits are 
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old 
they spoke the languages of Men, after their own fashion, and liked and 
disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship 
is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in 
the Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves still 
preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are 
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom 
and Hobbits are not mentioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in 
fact, lived quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk 
became even aware of them. And the world being after all full of strange 
creatures beyond count, these little people seemed of very little 
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly 
became, by no wish of their own, both important and renowned, and troubled 




the counsels of the Wise and the Great. 

Those days, the Third Age of Middle -earth, are now long past, and the 
shape of all lands has been changed; but the regions in which Hobbits then 
lived were doubtless the same as those in which they still linger: the 
North-West of the Old World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the 
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning (other 
than genealogical lore) was far from general among them, but there remained 
still a few in the older families who studied their own books, and even 
gathered reports of old times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and 
Men. Their own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and 
their most ancient legends hardly looked further back than their Wandering 
Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of 
their peculiar words and customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in 
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time 
when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of 
Greenwood 

the Great and the Misty Mountains. Why they later undertook the hard and 
perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their 
own accounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of a shadow 
that fell on the forest, so that it became darkened and its new name was 
Mirkwood. 

Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had already become 
divided into three somewhat different breeds: Harfoots, Stoors, and 
Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner of skin, smaller, and shorter, and 
they were beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble; 
and they preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier 
in build; their feet and hands were larger, and they preferred flat lands 
and riversides. The Fallohides were fairer of skin and also of hair, and 
they were taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of trees and 
of woodlands. 

The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and long 
lived in the foothills of the mountains. They moved westward early, and 
roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the others were still in the 
Wilderland. They were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit, 
and far the most numerous. They were the most inclined to settle in one 
place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit of living in tunnels and 
holes. 




The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin, and 
were less shy of Men. They came west after the Harfoots and followed the 
course of the Loudwater southwards; and there many of them long dwelt 
between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. 

The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were 
more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in 
language and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to 
tilling. They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came down the 
River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with the other kinds that had 
preceded them, but being somewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were 
often found as leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even 
in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the 
greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland. 

In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains and the 
Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a remnant 
still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that came over the Sea 
out of Westernesse; but they were dwindling fast and the lands of their 
North Kingdom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room and to 
spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began to settle in ordered 
communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been 
forgotten in Bilbo's time; but one of the first to become important still 
endured, though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that 
lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire. 

It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their 
letters and began to write after the manner of the D®nedain, who had in 
their turn long before learned the art from the Elves. And in those days 
also they forgot whatever languages they had used before, and spoke ever 
after the Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was current 
through all the lands of the kings from Arnor to Gondor, and about all the 
coasts of the Sea from B elf alas to Lune. Yet they kept a few words of their 
own, as well as their own names of months and days, and a great store of 
personal names out of the past. 

About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes history with a 
reckoning of years. For it was in the one thousand six hundred and first 
year of the Third Age that the Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set 
out from Bree; and having obtained permission from the high king at 
Fornostl, they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a great following of 




Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been built in 
the days of the power of the North Kingdom, and they took ail the land 
beyond to dwell in, between the river and the Far Downs. All that was 
demanded of them was that they should keep the Great Bridge in repair, and 
all other bridges and roads, speed the king's messengers, and acknowledge 
his lordship. 

Thus began the Shire-reckoning, for the year of the crossing of the 
Brandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) became Year One of the Shire, 
and all later dates were reckoned from it. 2 At once the western Hobbits fell 
in love with their new land, and they remained there, and soon passed once 
more out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still a king 
they were in name his subjects, but they were, in fact, ruled by their own 
chieftains and meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To the 
last battle at Fornost with the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen 
to the aid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record 
it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the Hobbits took the 
land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the 
authority of the king that was gone. There for a thousand years they were 
little troubled by wars, and they prospered and multiplied after the Dark 
Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of the Long Winter and the famine that 
followed it. Many thousands then perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) 
were at the time of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become 
accustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and though it had long 
been deserted when they entered it, it had before been well tilled, and 
there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods. 

Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, 
and fifty from the northern moors to the marshes in the south. The Hobbits 
named it the Shire, as the region of the authority of their Thain, and a 
district of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant comer of the 
world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded less 
and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to think 
that peace and plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all 
sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the 
Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible the long peace of 
the Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased to remember 
it. 

At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they had never 




fought among themselves. In olden days they had, of course, been often 
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time 
that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and 
indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the 
Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in 
which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Ores. Even the weathers had 
grown 

milder, and the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in 
bitter white winters were now only a grandfather's tale. So, though there 
was still some store of weapons in the Shire, these were used mostly as 
trophies, hanging above hearths or on walls, or gathered into the museum at 
Michel Delving. The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits 
had no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away, they called a 
mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become rather crowded with mathoms, 
and 

many of the presents that passed from hand to hand were of that son. 

Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough. 

They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they were, 
perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good things not least because they could, 
when put to it, do without them, and could survive rough handling by grief, 
foe, or weather in a way that astonished those who did not know them well 
and looked no further than their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though 
slow to quarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty 
at bay, and at need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, 
for they were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows. 
If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get quickly under cover, 
as all trespassing beasts knew very well. 

All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they 
believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in the 
course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually 
in the Shire in Bilbo's days it was, as a rule, only the richest and the 
poorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living 
in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, with only one 
window or none; while the well-to-do still constructed more luxurious 
versions of the simple diggings of old. But suitable sites for these large 
and ramifying tunnels (or smicils as they called them) were not everywhere to 
be found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as they 




multiplied, began to build above ground. Indeed, even in the hilly regions 
and the older villages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the chief 
township of the Shire, Michel Delving on the White Downs, there were now 
many houses of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by 
millers, smiths, ropers, and Cartwrights, and others of that sort; for even 
when they had holes to live in. Hobbits had long been accustomed to build 
sheds and workshops. 

The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among 
the inhabitants of the Marish down by the Brandywine. The Hobbits of that 
quarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore 
dwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were well known to be Stoors in a 
large part of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on 
their chins. No Harfoot or Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the 
folk of the Marish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they 
afterwards occupied, came for the most part later into the Shire up from 
south-away; and they still had many peculiar names and strange words not 
found elsewhere in the Shire. 

It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside, 
was derived from the D®nedain. But the Hobbits may have learned it direct 
from the Elves, the teachers of Men in their youth. For the Elves of the 
High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that 
time at the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within reach 
of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen on 
the Tower Hills beyond the western marches. They shone far off in the 
moonlight. The tallest was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. 
The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop 
of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been known to climb it. Indeed, few 
Hobbits had ever seen or sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever 
returned to report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats 
with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim. And as the days of 
the Shire lengthened they spoke less and less with the Elves, and grew 
afraid of them, and distrustful of those that had dealings with them; and 
the Sea became a word of fear among them, and a token of death, and they 
turned their faces away from the hills in the west. 

The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits 
used it in their own fashion. They did not go in for towers. Their houses 
were usually long, low, and comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no 




more than built imitations of smials, thatched with dry grass or straw, or 
roofed with turves, and having walls somewhat bulged. That stage, however, 
belonged to the early days of the Shire, and hobbit -building had long since 
been altered, improved by devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by 
themselves. A preference for round windows, and even round doors, was the 
chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture. 

The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large, and 
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very 
exceptional, as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship 
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or 
the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives lived in 
(comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many -tunnelled mansion. 
All Hobbits were, in any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships 
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with innumerable 
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related 
to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out 
a family -tree that included even the more important members of the more 
important families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical 
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book in 
themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits 
delighted in such things, if they were accurate: they liked to have books 
filled with things that they already knew, set out fair and square with no 
contradictions. 
